Fill out language reference (#12)
argumentcomputer/user-manual: src/07-reference.md

# Language reference

This is a living specification of the current set of built-ins in the `.lurk` package.

## Built-in atoms

### `nil`

> `nil` is boolean false ans also the empty list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`nil` is boolean false and can also represent the empty list.
```

It has its own type differently from other symbols.

```
user> (eq nil '())
[3 iterations] => t
user> (cdr '(1))
[2 iterations] => nil
user> (if nil "true" "false")
[3 iterations] => "false"
```

### `t`

`t` is boolean true. In boolean contexts like `if`, anything that isn't `nil` is considered false, but `t` is generally used.

```
user> (eq 1 1)
[2 iterations] => t
user> (if t "true" "false")
[3 iterations] => "true"
```

## Built-in functions

### `atom`

> `(atom x)` returns `nil` if `x` is a list or a pair, and `t` otherwise.

Reviewer: It's probably better to just say "pair" because `nil` is the empty list.

If we try to treat lists as first class objects, the details won't match. It's better to treat lists as constructions on top of pairs, like I did in the Lisp chapter. Then everything fits nicely.

```
user> (atom nil)
[2 iterations] => t
user> (atom t)
[2 iterations] => t
user> (atom (cons 1 2))
[4 iterations] => nil
user> (atom '(1 2 3))
[2 iterations] => nil
```

### `begin`

`(begin forms...)` evaluates each of its arguments in sequence and return the last evaluation.

```
user> (begin 1 2 3)
[6 iterations] => 3
user> ((lambda (x) (begin (emit x) (+ x x))) 1)
1
[8 iterations] => 2
```

### `bignum`

`(bignum x)` tries to convert `x` to a big num. Can only be used with commitments currently. Returns `<Err CantCastToBigNum>` if the types are incompatible.

```
user> (bignum (commit 1))
[3 iterations] => #0x35ff7b6fb1e777a95aadced4e080fa9c024a47d7b1f81d217fa04a2a494fbb
```

### `car`

> `(car cons-cell)` returns the first element of its argument if it is a pair. Also works with lists and strings, returning its first element. Returns `<Err NotCons>` otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(car cons-cell)` returns the first element of its argument if it is a pair. Also works with strings, returning its first character. Returns `<Err NotCons>` otherwise.
```

```
user> (car (cons 1 2))
[4 iterations] => 1
user> (car '(1 2 3))
[2 iterations] => 1
user> (car (strcons 'a' "b"))
[4 iterations] => 'a'
user> (car "abc")
[2 iterations] => 'a'
```

### `cdr`

> `(cdr cons-cell)` returns the second element of its argument if it is a pair. Also works with lists and strings, returning its remainder. Returns `<Err NotCons>` otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(cdr cons-cell)` returns the second element of its argument if it is a pair. Also works with strings, returning its tail. Returns `<Err NotCons>` otherwise.
```

```
user> (cdr (cons 1 2))
[4 iterations] => 2
user> (cdr '(1 2 3))
[2 iterations] => (2 3)
user> (cdr (strcons 'a' "b"))
[4 iterations] => "b"
user> (cdr "ab")
[2 iterations] => "b"
```

### `char`

> `(char x)` tries to convert `x` to a character. Can be used with integers. Returns `<Err CantCastToChar>` if the types are incompatible.

Reviewer: It's important to say that `char` only considers the first - least significant - 4 bytes. The rest is ignored.

```
user> (char 0x41)
[2 iterations] => 'A'
user> (char 65)
[2 iterations] => 'A'
user> (char nil)
[2 iterations] => <Err CantCastToChar>
```

### `commit`

`(commit x)` is equivalent to `(hide #0x0 x)`. It creates a commitment to the result of evaluating `x`, but sets the secret to the default of zero.

```
user> (commit 1)
[2 iterations] => (comm #0x35ff7b6fb1e777a95aadced4e080fa9c024a47d7b1f81d217fa04a2a494fbb)
user> (open (comm #0x35ff7b6fb1e777a95aadced4e080fa9c024a47d7b1f81d217fa04a2a494fbb))
[3 iterations] => 1
user> (secret (comm #0x35ff7b6fb1e777a95aadced4e080fa9c024a47d7b1f81d217fa04a2a494fbb))
[3 iterations] => #0x0
```

### `comm`

`(comm x)` tries to convert `x` to a commitment. Can only be used with big nums currently. Returns `<Err CantCastToComm>` if the types are incompatible.

```
user> (comm #0x0)
[2 iterations] => (comm #0x0)
user> (bignum (comm #0x0))
[3 iterations] => #0x0
user> (open (comm #0x35ff7b6fb1e777a95aadced4e080fa9c024a47d7b1f81d217fa04a2a494fbb))
[3 iterations] => 1
```

### `cons`

> `(cons x y)` creates a new pair with first element `x` and second element `y`. The result of `(cons x y)` is also denoted by `(x . y)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(cons x y)` creates a new pair with first element `x` and second element `y`. The result of `(cons x y)` is denoted by `(x . y)` or simply `(x)` if `y` is nil.
```

```
user> (eq (cons 1 nil) (cons 1 '()))
[6 iterations] => t
user> (cons 1 2)
[3 iterations] => (1 . 2)
user> (car (cons 1 2))
[4 iterations] => 1
user> (cdr (cons 1 2))
[4 iterations] => 2
user> (cons 1 '(2 3))
[3 iterations] => (1 2 3)
```

### `current-env`

`(current-env)` returns the current environment. The current environment can be modified by `let`, `letrec` and `lambda` expressions.

See also the REPL meta-commands `def`, `defrec` and `clear` for interacting with the current REPL environment.

```
user> (current-env)
[1 iteration] => <Env ()>
user> (let ((x 1)) (current-env))
[3 iterations] => <Env ((x . 1))>
user> (letrec ((x 1)) (current-env))
[3 iterations] => <Env ((x . <Thunk 1>))>
user> ((lambda (x) (current-env)) 1)
[4 iterations] => <Env ((x . 1))>
```

### `emit`

> `(emit x)` prints `x` to the output and return `x`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(emit x)` prints `x` to the output and returns `x`.
```
